Meenakshi Sundaram Pillai or Mahavidhvan Meenakshisundaram Pillai was a Tamil scholar and teacher of U. V. Swaminatha Iyer, a Tamil scholar and researcher who was instrumental in bringing many long-forgotten works of classical Tamil literature to light. Pillai's important contribution is in the form of temple history called Thala Varalaru for ninety temples in Tamil Nadu. He was born in Trichy and went on to associate himself with Thiruvaduthurai Adheenam. He was an ardent devotee of Sivaperuman and a Tamil teacher.

Some of his notable works are Prabada Tirattu, Kanthimathiammai Pillai Tamil, Sri Mangalambigai Pillai Tamil, Perunthipirattiyar Pillai Tamil and Thiruvidaikazhi Murugar Pillai Tamil.

Biography
Meenakshi Sundaram Pillai was born on 6 April 1815 to Chidambram Pillai and Annathachi Ammayar in Somarasanpettai in Trichy. He born in a Tamil Vellalar family. He got his early education from his father who taught him Tamil literature and also Mathematics. He then went on to learn Tamil from Velayutha Munivar in Mounamadam in Rockfort. He also learnt from other people such as Velur Subramanya Desikar, Sri Sivakkira Yogi Mutt head Ambalavana Munivar, Keezhavelur Subramanya Pandaram, Kanchipuram Sababathi Muthaliyar and 'Thandiyalangar' Paradesiyar. He married Kaveriachi in his fifteenth year. He got Sivadikshai on his 21st year Thirisirapuram Setti Pandrathiya. He went on to associate himself with Thiruvaduthurai Adheenam where he started teaching and publishing his works.[1]

Mahamahopadhyaya Dr. U. V. Swaminatha Iyer compiled Pilla's biography in Tamil, which was translated into English by Sridharam K. Guruswamy. as "A Poet's Poet" (Maha Vidhwan Sri Meenakshisundaram Pillai of Tiruchrappalli).[2] This book of 129 pages was first published in the year 1976 by Mahamahopadhyaya Dr. U. V. Swaminatha Iyer Library, Madras, now known as Chennai.[1]

In addition, we get to know the poetic brilliance and the unwavering Tamil bhakti of Poet Meenakshi Sundaram Pillai, and the high regard the Tamil-speaking world idolized him, by reading the first 300 pages of the Autobiography of Dr. U. Ve. Swaminatha Iyer, En Saritham. It was to the credit of the Saivite Thiruvaavaduthurai mutt and the then Sannidhanam HH. Subramania Desikar that Poet Meenakshi Sundaram Pillai could sustain despite the severe monetary challenges faced. Another aspect is of the Guru Sishya relation that moves one to tears and shows the dark contrast to the low level, education of our current times have degraded to. A disciple (in the form of U. Ve. Sa) like a calf that has strayed out for a few days, longing for its mother, and The Poet as the searching and longing mother yearning to nourish the calf (his disciple and take care of his Tamil hunger as well as the real hunger). He passed away at Thiruvaaduthurai after ailing for sometime, with his two foremost disciples at the deathbed, Saverinatha Pillai massaging his feet and U. V. Swaminatha Iyer reciting from the Thiruvaasagam.[1]

He was an ardent Saivite, but held Kamban and his Ramayanam in the loftiest pedestal. It would be fair to say that in the last 200 years, Pillai has contributed possibly the largest corpus to Tamil poetic literature than any other poet, and by his teaching and through his students brought out the greatness of Tamil literature to the public at large and beyond. Remember all of this literature are aligned to the Yaappu and Ani Illakanam (Poetic grammar) and much before the advent of the new style of poem writing (Pudhu Kavidhai). He was an ardent teacher and ensured noon meals for all his pupils.[3]